Trade Receivables Finance & Securitization

//follows integrated supply chain blog 
//polish once we have finished bpmn for PO, invoice, bill of lading, inspection.

Trade receivables securitization allows a company to receive cash due from its trade receivables immediately by pledging its receivables ownership to a lender thereby gaining access to immediate liquidity despite the fact that the payment terms may be 30 days or more. A lender lends money to the company based on taking ownership of these future cash flows owing to the company. Depending on operational considerations, this may be done through a special purpose, bankruptcy remote entity.

Seller’s User Story - Example - enterprise accounting software vector.

Seller is a SME using enterprise accounting software, like Intuit’s Quickbooks.

Seller goes through an application/approval process to be admitted to the lending platform, and has parameters for receivables that are admitted to system.

Seller’s customer contract models must support this contractual agreement, but don’t necessarily need to be created ab initio in smart contracts. However, this integration of smart contract invoicing and trade finance is a natural starting place for a platform like Intuit, whose users already create invoices inside the program.

Seller in the ordinary course of business accumulates an income stream in the form of notes, invoices or accounts receivable. The nature of these income stream objects will differ from business to business, and the manner of capturing the objects in the immutable record will vary for the seller based on the seller’s business model.

Elements

Receivable objects - These can be created in many ways, depending on Seller’s business model. These must be represented by negotiable documents of title, for example, UCC Article 7, UNCITRAL (e.g. Promissory note parameters plus a little extra magic words). A complete blockchain contract system based on the accounting platform easiest to imagine in an e-commerce setting.

Promissory Note

Security Agreement -Legal “magic words” required. For example: “Seller grants lender a security interest in receivables, including after-acquired property.”

Payment Protocol

Default Protocol. Critical in trade finance. Individual contracts/receivable objects fail in the ordinary course of business.

Contract Terms and Conditions (dual-integration)

How the model works: Need to check jurisdictional requirements re: bankruptcy remote.

It is anticipated that the pool of receivable objects will be constantly changing. Receivables are added to the value pool and canceled once they are paid completely. It is critical that the security agreement reflects the changing nature of the value pool

Seller goes through an approval and credit check process in order to be able to get trade receivables financing and add to the network (integrations)

Seller enters into a loan transaction with the financer to get a loan. Seller makes a promise to pay and executes a security agreement granting a security interest in the trade receivables.

The security interest extends to future invoices, so each time seller enters an invoice or receives payment, state of security pool is updated.

Seller makes loan payments and records receivables payment (again, easier to iterate in e-commerce)

Finance company can receive payment or rehypothecate the trade receivable for sale.

Default: this must be considered, and is highly individual on the use case.



Trade receivables securitization

Parties:
Bank/Secured Party
Seller/Creditor
Buyer/Debtor

The structure of this deal is important, because it must not create a direct relationship between bank and debtor. Instead, the bank is the secured party, that is, the receivables are collateral for a loan to the seller.  While it’s important to get technically right, there are several ways to structure it, mostly depending on how far removed from the original buyer/seller transaction the bank/secured party is (i.e. rehypothecation).

Contract 1 Note

The base transaction is the sale between Seller and Buyer.

Note (with Security agreement if it includes goods). Buyer promises to pay Seller for goods or services.   Agrees to whatever financing terms Seller needs, including those that enable Seller to securitize the obligation. The expected payments from this contract are the receivables. These contracts may be pooled as collateral.

Contract 2  Note and Security agreement

Between Bank and Seller.  Note is secured by the receivables from Contract 1 (or some collection of contracts owned by seller)
Note and Security agreement transfers nothing but the CP, not contractual rights between Seller and Debtor.
Seller is to make payments on the note to the bank, or some other acceptable servicing arrangement.
Contract gives parameters of the receivables subject to the security interest, including standards for adding receivables to the pool.

Contract 3 Services Contract spells Bank’s rights with respect to the debtor’s payments, including in the event of Seller default.

Contract 4 Default priorities and payouts

Between Bank, Seller and Third Parties (others who have an interest in the subject trade receivables, or who are otherwise entitled to payment)  determining the priority of payments in the event of default or other specified event.




Default Provisions in the three contracts will work together.

Settlement at periodic times.

Transparency
